docs: Cairo builtins, based on PR#1202 (#1243)
starknet-io/starknet-docs: components/Starknet/modules/architecture_and_concepts/pages/Smart_Contracts/cairo-builtins.adoc

[id="cairo-builtins"]
= Cairo builtins

> _Builtins_ in Cairo are predefined optimized low-level execution units that the Cairo VM refers to in order to perform predefined computations that are expensive to perform in standard Cairo. Builtins enhance the functionality of the Cairo VM, enabling you to perform certain tasks, such as using the Poseidon hash, range-checks, or ECDSA signature verifications, more efficiently, using less gas.

Reviewer: > using less gas

using less trace cells (the unit in which we usually measure proving-complexity).

Author: PTAL

> In contrast to CairoZero, where you needed to consciously write code to take advantage of builtin optimizations, in Cairo, you simply write code without doing anything special, and when the Cairo VM executes the code, certain operations take advantage of builtins to optimize logic and use less gas.

Reviewer: > and when the Cairo VM executes the code, certain operations take advantage of builtins to optimize logic and use less gas

and certain operations will use builtins under the hood to optimize your program.

Author: PTAL

[#list-of-cairo-builtins]
.List of Cairo builtins

[cols="1,2",]
|===
|Name of builtin | Description

> |Pedersen |Computes the Pedersen hash over two elements. For more information see xref:architecture_and_concepts:Cryptography/hash-functions.adoc[].

Reviewer: This builtin is used under the hood in [pedersen.cairo](https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/blob/6ee23d6bf62d4d81b9d47f67facca98c22dc4c95/corelib/src/pedersen.cairo)

> |Poseidon |Computes the Hades permutation on three field elements. For more info, see xref to Hash functions topic. The Cairo corelib functions use this builtin under the hood. The Cairo corelib functions are defined in link:https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/blob/v2.6.0/corelib/src/starknet/info.cairo[`info.cairo`] in the Cairo GitHub repository.

Reviewer: This builtin is used under the hood in [poseidon.cairo](https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/blob/6ee23d6bf62d4d81b9d47f67facca98c22dc4c95/corelib/src/poseidon.cairo)

Author: PTAL.

|Range check a|
Checks whether a field element is in the range [0,2^128^-1].

> All arithmetic comparisons use the range check builtin.

Reviewer: The range check builtin is used when instantiating and comparing the various integer types.

Author: DONE.

> |ECDSA |Verifies the validity of an ECDSA signature over the STARK curve.

Reviewer: Only used in CairoZero due to its failability on invalid signatures. In Cairo ECDSA verification is done with high level code and applying the EC_OP builtin twice.

Author: Done. @ArielElp Please approve my wording.

Reviewer: I don't like "tendency" since it always fails for invalid signatures, suggesting: "due to it being failable, as it fails on invalid signatures".

Author: OK. FYI, _failable_ is not a word. _Fallable_ is, but that's not what you mean here.

I changed it to:

> This was used in CairoZero, but is not used in Cairo because it always fails on invalid signatures.

> |Keccak | _TBD_

Author: @ArielElp Please add a description here.

Reviewer: Computes the [keccak-f[1600] permutation](https://keccak.team/keccak.html). For high level Cairo keccak functions that use this builtin under the hood, see [keccak.cairo](https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/blob/455788e543f890b2135d8d6bf789b0219aa81724/corelib/src/keccak.cairo#L62) in the corelib.

> |Bitwise |Computes the bitwise operations `OR`, `AND`, and `XOR` of two felts.

Reviewer: Used under the hood when performing bitwise operations via the `|`, `&` and `^` operators.

Author: @ArielElp Done.

[#list-of-cairo-builtins]
.List of Cairo builtins

[cols="1,2",]
|===
|Name of builtin | Description

|Pedersen | Computes the Pedersen hash over two elements. Used internally in `pedersen.cairo`. For more information see xref:architecture_and_concepts:Cryptography/hash-functions.adoc[].
|Poseidon |Computes the Hades permutation on three field elements. Used internally in `poseidon.cairo`. For more information, see xref:architecture_and_concepts:Cryptography/hash-functions.adoc[]. The Cairo corelib functions use this builtin internally. The Cairo corelib functions are defined in link:https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/blob/v2.6.0/corelib/src/starknet/info.cairo[`info.cairo`] in the Cairo GitHub repository.
|Range check a|
Checks whether a field element is in the range [0,2^128^-1].

Used when instantiating and comparing the various integer types.

All arithmetic comparisons use the range check builtin.

|ECDSA |Verifies the validity of an ECDSA signature over the STARK curve.

> This is used in CairoZero, but is not used in Cairo because it always fails on invalid signatures. In Cairo ECDSA verification is performed with high-level code, applying the `EC_OP` builtin twice.

Author: ```suggestion
This is used in CairoZero, but is not used in Cairo because it fails on invalid signatures. In Cairo ECDSA verification is performed with high-level code, applying the `EC_OP` builtin twice.
```

[id="cairo-builtins"]
= Cairo builtins

> _Builtins_ in Cairo are predefined optimized low-level execution units that the Cairo VM refers to in order to perform predefined computations that are expensive to perform in standard Cairo. Builtins enhance the functionality of the Cairo VM, enabling you to perform certain tasks, such as using the Poseidon hash, range-checks, or ECDSA signature verifications, more efficiently, using fewer trace cells.

Author: @ArielElp This is the only place where I see any mention of the term _trace cells_. I can't find it on Google, I don't see it in the Cairo Book. If we're going to use it here, then we should define it in the Glossary and add a link to it here.

Can you give me a definition?

Reviewer: Trace cells are a measure of proving complexity. In the STARK protocol, a computation is translated to an execution trace that must satisfy a collection of constraints (this is known as "AIR", algebraic intermediate representation). For example, every Cairo step translates to ~50 trace cells.

Author: I'll add this to the glossary.

In contrast to CairoZero, where you needed to consciously write code to take advantage of builtin optimizations, in Cairo, you simply write code without doing anything special, and when the Cairo VM executes the code, certain operations use builtins internally to optimize your program.

[#list-of-cairo-builtins]
.List of Cairo builtins

[cols="1,2",]
|===
|Name of builtin | Description

|Pedersen | Computes the Pedersen hash over two elements. Used internally in `pedersen.cairo`. For more information see xref:architecture_and_concepts:Cryptography/hash-functions.adoc[].
|Poseidon |Computes the Hades permutation on three field elements. Used internally in `poseidon.cairo`. For more information, see xref:architecture_and_concepts:Cryptography/hash-functions.adoc[]. The Cairo corelib functions use this builtin internally. The Cairo corelib functions are defined in link:https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/blob/v2.6.0/corelib/src/starknet/info.cairo[`info.cairo`] in the Cairo GitHub repository.

> |Range check a|

Reviewer: a?

Author: It's an AsciiDoc notation.

In a table, when you precede a table cell with `a`, as in this case, the `a` means that the table cell should support certain AsciiDoc formatting that table cells might not support by default. In this case, I wanted to make sure that the exponential notation would show as I intended.

Checks whether a field element is in the range [0,2^128^-1].

Used when instantiating and comparing the various integer types.

All arithmetic comparisons use the range check builtin.

> Computes the keccak-f[1600] permutation. For more information see link:https://keccak.team/keccak.html[_Keccak_] page on the _Keccak Team_ site.

Reviewer: This should be under keccak

For high level Cairo keccak functions that use this builtin under the hood, see `keccak.cairo` in the corelib at https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/blob/455788e543f890b2135d8d6bf789b0219aa81724/corelib/src/keccak.cairo#L62.

|ECDSA |Verifies the validity of an ECDSA signature over the STARK curve.

Only used in CairoZero due to its tendency to fail on invalid signatures. In Cairo ECDSA verification is performed with high-level code, applying the `EC_OP` builtin twice.

|Keccak |
|Bitwise |Computes the bitwise operations `OR`, `AND`, and `XOR` of two felts.

> Used under the hood when performing bitwise operations using the `+|+`, `+&+` and `+^+` operators.

Author: ```suggestion
Used internally when performing bitwise operations using the `|`, `&` and `^` operators.
```
